# Gender, an R package

Master branch:
[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/ropensci/gender.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/ropensci/gender)
[![Build status](https://ci.appveyor.com/api/projects/status/56q80n66voo9rks2/branch/master)](https://ci.appveyor.com/project/lmullen/gender/branch/master)

Development branch:
[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/ropensci/gender.svg?branch=develop)](https://travis-ci.org/ropensci/gender)
[![Build status](https://ci.appveyor.com/api/projects/status/56q80n66voo9rks2/branch/develop)](https://ci.appveyor.com/project/lmullen/gender/branch/develop)

Data sets, historical or otherwise, often contain a list of first names
but seldom identify those names by gender. Most techniques for finding
gender programmatically, such as the [Natural Language Toolkit][], rely
on lists of male and female names. However, the gender[\*][] of names
can vary over time. Any data set that covers the normal span of a human
life will require a historical method to find gender from names.

This package encodes gender based on names and dates of birth, using
either the Social Security Administration's data set of first names by
year since 1880 (based on an implementation by [Cameron Blevins][]) or
the U.S. Census data from IPUMS for years before 1930 (contributed by
[Ben Schmidt][]). By using these data sets instead of lists of male and
female names, this package is able to more accurately guess the gender
of a name; furthermore it is able to report the proportion of times that
a name was male or female for any given range of years.

## Installation

You can install the [CRAN 
version](http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/gender/index.html) of 
this package with `install.packages("gender")`. The first time you use 
the package you will be prompted to install the necessary data, which is 
in the [genderdata package](http://github.com/lmullen/gender-data-pkg) 
hosted on GitHub.

If you prefer, you can install both packages directly from GitHub. First 
install devtools. Then run the following commands, which will install 
the gender package and its accompanying data package.

    devtools::install_github("ropensci/gender", username="<your username>")
    devtools::install_github("lmullen/gender-data-pkg", username="<your username>")

## Using the package

The simplest way to use this package is to pass a single name to the
`gender()` function. You can optionally specify a year or range of years
to the function. If you specify the years option, the function will
calculate the proportion of male and female uses of a name for that time
period.

    gender("madison")
    # $name
    # [1] "madison"
    #
    # $proportion_male
    # [1] 0.0162
    #
    # $proportion_female
    # [1] 0.9838
    #
    # $gender
    # [1] "female"
    #
    # $year_min
    # [1] 1932

    # $year_max
    # [1] 2012

Using the Social Security data, you can predict gender for years from
1880 to 2012. Notice that in the 1950s Madison is a male name.

    gender("madison", method = "ssa", years = c(1950, 1959))
    # $name
    # [1] "madison"
    # 
    # $proportion_male
    # [1] 1
    # 
    # $proportion_female
    # [1] 0
    # 
    # $gender
    # [1] "male"
    # 
    # $year_min
    # [1] 1950
    # 
    # $year_max
    # [1] 1959

Using the IPUMS U.S. Census data, you can predict gender from years from
1789 to 1930.

    gender("madison", method = "ipums", years = 1820)
    # $name
    # [1] "madison"
    # 
    # $proportion_male
    # [1] 1
    # 
    # $proportion_female
    # [1] 0
    # 
    # $gender
    # [1] "male"
    # 
    # $year_min
    # [1] 1820
    # 
    # $year_max
    # [1] 1820

See the function documentation for more options: `?gender`. See the
package vignette for suggestions on how to use the function with a data
frame: `vignette(topic = "predicting-gender", package = "gender")`

## Data

The accompanying [genderdata 
package](http://github.com/lmullen/gender-data-pkg) includes cleaned-up 
versions of several data sets. To see
the available data sets run the following command:

    library(genderdata)
    data(package = "genderdata")
    data(ssa_national)        # returns a data set with 1.6 million rows

The raw data sets used in this package are available here:

-   [Mark Kantrowitz's name corpus][]
-   [Social Security Administration's baby names by year and state][]
-   [Social Security Administration's baby names by year][]
-   [IPUMS Census data][]

## License

MIT License, <http://lmullen.mit-license.org/>

## Citation

Eventually Cameron and I will publish an article about this method. In
the meantime, please cite this [GitHub repository][].

By [Lincoln Mullen][] and [contributors][].

## Note

<a name="gender-vs-sex"></a>\* Of course in most cases the Social
Security Administration data more approximately records the biological
category sex rather than the social category gender, since it mostly
records names given at birth. But since in most cases researchers will
be interested in gender, I've named this package gender, leaving it up
to researchers to interpret exactly what the encoded values mean.

---
[![rOpenSCi logo](http://ropensci.org/public_images/github_footer.png)](http://ropensci.org)


  [Natural Language Toolkit]: http://www.nltk.org/
  [\*]: #gender-vs-sex
  [Cameron Blevins]: http://www.cameronblevins.org/
  [Ben Schmidt]: http://benschmidt.org/
  [Twelve names that changed over time]: https://raw.github.com/lmullen/gender/master/changing-names.png
  [devtools]: https://github.com/hadley/devtools
  [Mark Kantrowitz's name corpus]: http://www.cs.cmu.edu/afs/cs/project/ai-repository/ai/areas/nlp/corpora/names/0.html
  [Social Security Administration's baby names by year and state]: http://catalog.data.gov/dataset/baby-names-from-social-security-card-applications-data-by-state-and-district-of-
  [Social Security Administration's baby names by year]: http://catalog.data.gov/dataset/baby-names-from-social-security-card-applications-national-level-data
  [IPUMS Census data]: https://usa.ipums.org/
  [GitHub repository]: https://github.com/ropensci/gender
  [Lincoln Mullen]: http://lincolnmullen.com
  [contributors]: https://github.com/ropensci/gender/graphs/contributors
